---
title:  "The kimura R package"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - R
  - mtDNA
  - how-to
  - software
---

A few months ago I wrote [a post]({% post_url 2023-02-01-shift-in-r %}) about calculating normalised heteroplasmy shift in R from scratch. Scince then I have made a minor update to the [`kimura`]((https://github.com/lbozhilova/kimura)) R package which now includes out-of-the-box functions for calculating both normalised heteroplasmy shift and normalised heteroplasmy variance.

I originally wrote the package to expand on and optimise a [Python module](https://github.com/WeiWei060512/Kimura-Distribution) by Wei Wei which was itself a (re-?)implementation of code by [Wonnapinij _et al._ (2008)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2668051/). If you want to  have a play around with it, you can install it from GitHub in the usual way via `devtools::install_github("lbozhilova/kimura")`. It was designed to serve to purposes: to generate random numbers from the two-parameter Kimura distribution, which can then be used as synthetic heteroplasmy values, as well as to perform goodness-of-fit tests following the methodology of Wonnapinij _et al._ (2008). My main contribution in the R implementation was optimising the calculation of the Kimura probability density function, which now allows both simulations and tests to be performed at scale even with limited computational resources. Plus, I like R, and so do most of my colleagues. 

I developed `kimura` as a side-project for personal use, and decided I might as well make it public. Pleasingly, others have found it to be of use too, including [Giannakis _et al._ (2023)](https://academic.oup.com/g3journal/advance-article/doi/10.1093/g3journal/jkad068/7084750) and [Broz _et al._ (2022)](https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.2206973119). Recently, I have been tinkering with the package once again. Giannakis _et al._ (2023) make some interesting points on possible flaws in the original Wonnapinij _et al._ (2008) hypothesis testing methodology, which has had me noodling on alternative approaches.

While the testing piece is very much a work in progress and not yet public, I think it would be great if `kimura` served as a generic heteroplasmy analysis tool, especially for non-computational scientists. With this in mind I have now released a minor update with two new functions: `shift()` and `nvar()`. As the names suggest, these can be used to calculate normalised heteroplasmy shift, and normalised heteroplasmy variance. Below is a code snipped which shows generating heteroplasmy data `H`, calculating the shift from a baseline `H0`, and calculating the variance, which is related to the `b` parameter of the Kimura distribution as `nvar = 1 - b`.

```
> library("kimura")
> # generate some heteroplasmy data
> H <- round(100 * rkimura(20, 0.5, 0.9))
> H0 <- 50
> # calculate the heteroplasmy shift - this should have mean 0
> H_shift <- shift(H, H0)
> mean(H_shift)
[1] 0.06573089
> # calculate normalised variance; this should be 1 - 0.9 = 0.1
> nvar(H)
[1] 0.1037069
```

Happy coding! And do let me know, either here or on GitHub, if there are other features you would like to see in `kimura`.